Update the web standards model article (#37673)
mdn/content: files/en-us/learn_web_development/getting_started/web_standards/the_web_standards_model/index.md

## Brief history of the web

In the late 1960s, the US military developed a communication network called [ARPANET](/en-US/docs/Glossary/Arpanet). This can be considered a forerunner of the internet, as it worked on [packet switching](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Packet_switching), and featured the first implementation of the [TCP/IP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet_protocol_suite) protocol suite. These two technologies form the basis of the infrastructure that the internet is built on.

> [!NOTE]

> > It is worth mentioning that at a basic level, "the web" and "the internet" are basically the same thing, and people sometimes use them interchangeably. However, more accurately, the internet is the infrastructure that enables information to be transported around the world between different servers and clients, whereas the web is the information (content and code) being transported and the communications protocols used to manage that transport.

Author: Yeah, good point — I simplified this too much. In my next commit, I've rewritten this note and shifted things around a bit to improve accuracy and make the difference between the two clear.

Open standards enable the web to remain a freely-available public resource, where anyone can write the code to build a website for free, and anyone can contribute to the standards creation process.

### Accessible and interoperable

The web and web browsers are fundamentally designed so that web content is accessible to people with disabilities. It was originally envisaged as a great leveller, enabling people to access information regardless of circumstance. This means that, for example:

- People who are unable to use a mouse or pointing device cna use the keyboard to navigate the web.
- People who are visually impaired can magnify content, or use a program called a **screenreader** to read content out to them and describe controls in a way that makes sense.

> [!NOTE]
> You'll later more about [Accessibility](/en-US/docs/Learn_web_development/Core/Accessibility) later on in the learning pathway.

> In addition, new web technologies are created so that they use standard patterns, messaging protocols, and data formats, meaning that they will compatible with other technologies in the overall ecosystem. For example, any client-side technology that makes requests to a server should use the [HTTP](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP) standard to transmit those requests. It is no good creating a shiny new technology that can't talk to anything else.

Author: Ah yes, this makes sense. I was on a vaguely similar track, but I hadn't got the pharsing quite right. To fix this, I replaced it with your wording but massaged it a bit. I ended up with:

> In addition, web technologies are intended to be **interoperable**. Because web technologies are implemented according to published standards, browsers should provide the same rendered output for a given input (for example, HTML, CSS, or JS code) — in other words, a website should work consistently across multiple browsers.

### Don't break the web

Another phrase you'll hear around open web standards is "don't break the web". The idea behind this is that any new web technology should be backwards compatible with what went before it (so old websites will still continue to work), and forwards compatible (future technologies in turn will be compatible with what we currently have).

This means designing technologies so that new features:

- Don't change the way that existing features work, meaning that old websites will continue to work.

> - Use the same general code patterns as existing features, and don't just decide to start doing things in a different way.

Author: removed

For example, writing your own interface to communicate with your webcam and capture a video stream from it, but the JavaScript [`getUserMedia()`](/en-US/docs/Web/API/MediaDevices/getUserMedia#examples) API method allows you to do this fairly easily. It does all the hard work for you, behind the scenes, so you don't need to reinvent the wheel each time.

The simple code snippet above also uses an API. [`querySelector()`](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Document/querySelector) and [`textContent`](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Node/textContent) are both parts of the [Document Object Model (DOM)](/en-US/docs/Learn_web_development/Core/Scripting/DOM_scripting) family of APIs, which allow you to use JavaScript to manipulate web documents.

In the house analogy, JavaScript is like the cooker, TV, Microwave, or hairdryer — the things that give your house useful functionality.

### Other web technologies

There are other technologies used on the web, for example:

- [HTTP](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP) for communicating between clients and servers, as mentioned earlier.

> - [SVG](/en-US/docs/Web/SVG) for creating and manipularing vector graphics.

Reviewer: small typo
```suggestion
- [SVG](/en-US/docs/Web/SVG) for creating and manipulating vector graphics.
```

There are another class of languages called back-end (or server-side) languages, meaning that they are run on the server before the result is then sent to the browser to be displayed. A typical use for a server-side language is to get some data out of a database, generate some HTML to contain the data, then send the HTML over to the browser to display it to the user.

Example server-side frameworks include ASP.NET (C#), Django (Python), Laravel (PHP), and Next.js (JavaScript).

## Web best practices

We have briefly talked about the technologies that you'll use to build websites. Now let's discuss the best practices that web developers generally employ to ensure that their websites are usable by as many people as possible.

When doing web development, the main cause of uncertainty comes from the fact that you don't know what combination of technology each user will use to view your website:

- User 1 might be looking at it on an iPhone, with a small, narrow screen.
- User 2 might be looking at it on a Windows laptop with a widescreen monitor attached to it.

> - User 3 might be visually impaired, and using a screenreader to read and interact with the web page.

Reviewer: We're using "screen reader" elsewhere:

```suggestion
- User 3 might be visually impaired, and using a screen reader to read and interact with the web page.
```

- User 4 might be using a really old desktop machine that can't run modern browsers.

Because you don't know exactly what your users will use, you need to design defensively — make your website as flexible as possible, so that all of the above users can make use of it, even if they might not all get the same experience.

You'll come across the below concepts at some point in your studies, which represent best practices your websites should ideally adhere to. Don't worry about these too much for now. Throughout most of the course we try to teach these implicitly, meaning that when we teach you HTML, CSS, and JavaScript, our examples will follow the best practices where possible. Later on in your learning journey you will likely explore explicit teachings in these areas.

- **Progressive enhancement**

>   - : Creating a minimal experience that provides the essential functionality to all users, and layering on a better experience and other enhancements in browsers that can support them. Progressive enhancement is often seen as unimportant, because browsers tend to support new features more consistently these days, and people tend to have faster internet connections. However, you should think about examples relevant to the modern day — cutting down on decoration to make a mobile experience smoother and save on data, or providing a simpler, lower-bandwidth experience for users in developing countries who might still pay for home internet by the megabyte.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - : Creating a minimal experience that provides the essential functionality to all users, and layering on a better experience and other enhancements in browsers that can support them. Progressive enhancement is often seen as unimportant, because browsers tend to support new features more consistently these days, and people tend to have faster internet connections with higher limits on data usage. However, consider examples like cutting down on decoration to make a mobile experience smoother and save on data or providing a lighter, low-bandwidth experience for users who pay by the megabyte or have metered connections.
```
